README.md, before:

# Evaluating the accuracy of equivalent-source predictions using cross-validation

[Leonardo Uieda](https://www.leouieda.com/)<sup>1</sup> and
[Santiago Soler](https://santisoler.github.io/)<sup>2,3</sup>

> <sup>1</sup>Department of Earth, Ocean and Ecological Sciences, School of Environmental Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK<br>
> <sup>2</sup>CONICET, Argentina<br>
> <sup>3</sup>Instituto Geofísico Sismológico Volponi, Universidad Nacional de San Juan, Argentina<br>

Abstract submitted to the EGU2020 General Assembly.

|        |Info|
|-------:|:---|
|Session |TBD|
|Abstract|TBD|
|When    |TBD|
|Where   |TBD|
|Download|doi:TBD|


## Abstract

We investigate the use of cross-validation (CV) techniques to estimate the
accuracy of equivalent-source (also known as equivalent-layer) models for
interpolation and processing of potential-field data.
Our preliminary results indicate that some common CV algorithms (e.g., random
permutations and k-folds) tend to overestimate the accuracy.
We have found that blocked CV methods, where the data are split along spatial
blocks instead of randomly, provide more conservative accuracy estimates.
Beyond evaluating an equivalent-source model's performance, cross-validation
can be used to automatically determine configuration parameters, like source
depth and amount of regularization, that maximize prediction accuracy and avoid
over-fitting.

Widely used in gravity and magnetic data processing,
the equivalent-source technique consists of a linear model (usually point
sources) used to predict the observed field at arbitrary locations.
Upward-continuation, interpolation, gradient calculations, leveling, and
reduction-to-the-pole can be performed simultaneously by using the model
to make predictions (i.e., forward modelling).
The main challenges in applying equivalent-source processing are the heavy
computational load of fitting the model and its sensitivity to configuration
parameters, mainly the source depth and regularization parameter.

These objectives and challenges are shared with the many types of regression
methods in machine learning (ML).
The predictive performance of ML models is usually evaluated through
cross-validation, in which the data are split (usually randomly) into a
training set and a validation set.
Models are fit on the training set and their predictions are evaluated using
the validation set using a goodness-of-fit metric (e.g., mean square error).
Prior research from the statistical modelling of ecological data suggests that
prediction accuracy is usually overestimated when the data are spatially
auto-correlated.
This issue can be mitigated by splitting the data along spatial blocks
rather than randomly.
Indeed, we obtain more conservative accuracy estimates when applying blocked
versions of random permutations and k-fold to synthetic data.

Open-source software implementations of the equivalent-source and blocked
cross-validation (in progress) methods are available in the Python libraries
Harmonica and Verde, which are part of the Fatiando a Terra project
([www.fatiando.org](https://www.fatiando.org/)).


## License

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"><img
alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0"
src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br>
This content is licensed under a <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License</a>.

Commit message:

Join the second and third paragraphs
No need to mention computational load and other challenges if I'm not
going to address them later on.

README.md, after:

# Evaluating the accuracy of equivalent-source predictions using cross-validation

[Leonardo Uieda](https://www.leouieda.com/)<sup>1</sup> and
[Santiago Soler](https://santisoler.github.io/)<sup>2,3</sup>

> <sup>1</sup>Department of Earth, Ocean and Ecological Sciences, School of Environmental Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK<br>
> <sup>2</sup>CONICET, Argentina<br>
> <sup>3</sup>Instituto Geofísico Sismológico Volponi, Universidad Nacional de San Juan, Argentina<br>

Abstract submitted to the EGU2020 General Assembly.

|        |Info|
|-------:|:---|
|Session |TBD|
|Abstract|TBD|
|When    |TBD|
|Where   |TBD|
|Download|doi:TBD|


## Abstract

We investigate the use of cross-validation (CV) techniques to estimate the
accuracy of equivalent-source (also known as equivalent-layer) models for
interpolation and processing of potential-field data.
Our preliminary results indicate that some common CV algorithms (e.g., random
permutations and k-folds) tend to overestimate the accuracy.
We have found that blocked CV methods, where the data are split along spatial
blocks instead of randomly, provide more conservative accuracy estimates.
Beyond evaluating an equivalent-source model's performance, cross-validation
can be used to automatically determine configuration parameters, like source
depth and amount of regularization, that maximize prediction accuracy and avoid
over-fitting.

Widely used in gravity and magnetic data processing,
the equivalent-source technique consists of a linear model (usually point
sources) used to predict the observed field at arbitrary locations.
Upward-continuation, interpolation, gradient calculations, leveling, and
reduction-to-the-pole can be performed simultaneously by using the model
to make predictions (i.e., forward modelling).
Likewise, the use of linear models to make predictions is the backbone of many
machine learning (ML) applications.
The predictive performance of ML models is usually evaluated through
cross-validation, in which the data are split (usually randomly) into a
training set and a validation set.
Models are fit on the training set and their predictions are evaluated using
the validation set using a goodness-of-fit metric (e.g., mean square error).
Prior research from the statistical modelling of ecological data suggests that
prediction accuracy is usually overestimated when the data are spatially
auto-correlated.
This issue can be mitigated by splitting the data along spatial blocks
rather than randomly.
Indeed, we obtain more conservative accuracy estimates when applying blocked
versions of random permutations and k-fold to synthetic data.

Open-source software implementations of the equivalent-source and blocked
cross-validation (in progress) methods are available in the Python libraries
Harmonica and Verde, which are part of the Fatiando a Terra project
([www.fatiando.org](https://www.fatiando.org/)).


## License

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"><img
alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0"
src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br>
This content is licensed under a <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License</a>.
